In this video we're going to go
through an introduction to lists.
You've already looked at one sequence
type, which is the tech sequence type,
STR or string, and
we also looked at some of the operations
that can be performed on the string.
Now Python actually provides six
additional built in sequence types.
And they are the List,
the Range, the Tuple and
these three types we'll be
discussing in this section.
And there's also three binary sequence
types that will be the subject of future
sections, but we'll talk about those.
So there's actually useful summary of
the operations that can be performed on
sequences.
What I'm going to do is just open up
some documentation and show you that.
Gonna paste the link there and you can see
the link now just by making it a little
bit larger so
you can read it on the screen.
If you go to that page and have a look,
you can see that there's a good summary as
I mentioned of the various
operations that can be performed.
And the table itself is
actually quite useful, but
unfortunately the actual text itself
is written as a formal definition.
And it's really not that
easy to understand.
Good news is that we'll be explaining
it all in this course here anyway.
You're looking at these
operations on the screen.
Even though they're a little bit hard, bit
cryptic to read what they actually mean,
we've actually used the first
eight already in the course.
And if you look at the next two,
min and max,
they're probably fairly
obvious as to what they do.
Give you the smallest item and
the largest item.
And even if the results are reduced,
they are not always what you might expect.
Which you'll actually find
we're not actually using them.
But count could've been useful
in our previous change as well.
This is the s.count, total number of
occurrences, and we could've actually used
that to check that the input string
contained exactly three full stops.
So let's actually go back and check that
out and see how to do that in some code.
So, what we could've done is started
off and put ipAddress = input.
Please enter an IP address, like so.
In terms of validating it,
we could've done print ipaddress.count and
put dot in there.
So we're counting how many dots,
full stops are actually in there.
So if we actually run that.
Please enter an IP address 192.168.0.1.
You can see we got the number three there.
And again we can just try another one.
We could just try a bogus
one 10.5.4.3.2.1.
And that's returning five even,
that's an invalid IP address.
You can see that it's actually
correctly returning the right number
from stops it's found.
So that would have been very useful.
There's also another I want that
we're gonna look at in this section.
If we go back to the form again,
we're gonna be using index.
Index or the first occurrence of x in s.
So all these operations that I'm showing
you can be performed on any sequence type,
but we're actually gonna be
using them with lists here.
Let's go back to the code again.
It probably helps though if we start
off by talking about what is a list.
So what actually is a list in Python?
Think of a list as a sequence of things.
Now those things could be strings,
numbers, classes, or
pretty much anything else.
So if a list can be a sequence of strings,
and
a string is itself a sequence type
which we talked about earlier,
then it makes sense that a list can also
be a sequence of lists, which it can.
So this makes an incredibly useful,
if a little bit confusing initially,
as we're about to see.
So we're gonna actually start by looking
at the dead parrot list we used when
discussing four loops
in a previous section.
We're gonna make a slight change and
assign the list to a variable So
I'm just going to comment this code out.
So let's type parent_list =
["non pinin'", "no more",
"a stiff", bereft of love".
Again, Monty Python references there.
And this time I've assigned it,
as you can see, to a variable.
And we can use our for loop, for
state in parrot list: and print.
This parrot is + state.
So again, the list on line three it's
created when closing the individual items
in square brackets as you can see there.
It's separating each item
in the list with a comma.
And we can actually run this
to confirm that it works.
As parrot is, you can see
non-pointing is the first entry,
no more was the second one,
stiff and bereft of love.
So it actually went through the flow each
entry is a separate entry in the list and
we're able to print a message out.
It's also quite easy to append to
a list after you've created it.
So if you wanted to do that elsewhere in
the code, you could actually come down in
here and type parrot_list.append and
type in something like Norwegian Blue.
And then if we run that, we can
see that we successfully added an entry to
the end of the list by using the .append.
Now the other thing we can do
is have a list of numbers.
So, obviously we've used strings there.
But there's nothing stopping us
from actually having numbers so
we can do something like,
even equals 2, 4, 6, 8.
And we can say odd equals 1,
3, 5, 7, 9, like so.
And we could put numbers = even + odd,
print numbers.
So here we are actually concatenating
the even and odd lists and
we're assigning the result to a third
list, a new list, called numbers.
So let's actually try running that first.
And you notice we've actually got
246813579 so it successfully appended it
to numbers that were in the odd list
at the end of the even list and
actually created a third list when
we actually added to the numbers.
So the actual numbers list
contains the sum of both of them.
And we've got a couple of errors so
I should actually make an attempt
to actually fix those.
So we need to be adding that as white
space we have to get in to do this for
all our code, to make sure
the code's actually valid each time.
And this is actually telling us that
the list creation could be rewritten as
a list literal.
So I think and
that's some more advice from IntelliJ, but
we'll actually leave that for
the time being anyway.
We'll come back to that.
But looking at the list
that's been combined there,
as you can see,
they're not actually in order.
So obviously it'd be nice if we could
automatically get those in order so
they actually started from
lowest number to highest number.
And that's actually quite easy to do.
So we can actually, very simply use the
sort method which is part of a list and
type numbers.sort, like so.
And once we do that and
run it again you can see we've now
got the numbers correctly in order.
Now the sort method itself doesn't
return the sorted list, and
if you've actually used other
languages this may be what you expect.
You may expect the sort method to
actually return the sorted list, so
in other words this is not going to work.
So, if I give you an example,
if we actually remove that,
and actually comment that line out.
And if you did something like this, print
numbers.sort, you might assume that that
would actually print out the contents
of what was a sort of numbers.
And certainly that would be the case
in other programming language.
But if you run that we actually get None,
we get something completely different.
And the reason for
that is that Guido Van Rossum,
the guy who invented Python,
he chose this behavior deliberately, and
the idea was to provide a hint that the
sort method works on the object that it
was called upon,
rather than creating a new object.
And that's very important here that
It's not actually creating anything.
So the sort method or
function, the idea of it is that it
actually works on the existing variable,
the object in other words,
it doesn't actually create a new object.
And that's why in this
case .sort returns nothing.
So, we would then delete that code
out again and come back here.
And so, we've got at this point, our list.
Numbers.sort works on that list, and
resorts out, and then printing it out
obviously prints out the same variable,
which has now been sorted.
And I've got the numbers
in the right order like so.
So if you are new to programming, some of
this discussion may not make much sense.
You might be wondering what I'm talking
about when I'm talking about the .sort
returning an object.
And you are probably quite
happy with the way it works.
And I think indeed it actually does
make sense and it's quite intuitive.
But the reason I'm bringing it up is
because it's particularly important if you
have a seen this in other languages
you have to get used to this type of
behavior [INAUDIBLE].
Generally speaking if a method
acts on an object and changes it,
mutates it in other words.
Then the method is going
to return none but
the actual variable
object has been updated.
Now there is a way around this if you
want to create a new object rather than
sorting the one you have,
there's actually a built in function
sorter that's going to do that.
So we could actually change this code out.
So we'll get rid of .sort and
what we'll do is actually come up here and
delete that code and put numbers but
use a method called sorted.
Like so and sorted is a function
that's built in to Python.
If we run that,
you can see we've got the same result,
we've actually got it sorted, and
that does actually return and the number,
cuz obviously we're printing this out.
So it's returned a new list
containing the sorted numbers.
So that's different than
the .sort function you saw before.
This sorted function actually
returns the actual new object.
And of course, with that said,
we're printing it there, but
there's nothing stopping
us actually just putting
numbers_in_order = sorted(numbers),
like so.
And then just printing.
Print numbers in order,
which essentially is the same thing, so
that's going to work as well.
If we run that, we get the numbers
at sorted in the right order.
So, at that point, obviously,
we've got two lists.
We've got numbers, and numbers in order,
and they've got the same items, but,
obviously, different orders.
The first one,
numbers has got the numbers unsorted, and
numbers in order has obviously
has got the sorted numbers.
The other thing to keep
in mind is at this point,
even though they can both contain
the same items, Python will
not treat them as equal as we can see
with this code we're about to write.
And this important distinction is,
over top, if numbers equals numbers
in order Print the lists are equal.
And again they've got the same numbers in
them so you'd think maybe that would work,
but we'll try putting an else in there.
The lists are not equal.
So, I've actually run that.
We actually get the message back,
the lists are not equal.
And that's because even though
we've got the same numbers,
they're actually in a different order.
So obviously the first set of
numbers was unordered, and
the second set of numbers was ordered.
And as far as Python is concerned,
they aren't equal.
But we could do something like this.
We could actually do a test for
if numbers_in_order
is equal to sorted numbers.
Print, and we'll actually copy
the rest of the code there, so
we'll just do exactly the same.
Copy that, paste that.
So now we're actually testing numbers in
an order which has already been sorted,
and we're comparing that to
the return from this sorted function,
which will actually be numbers,
sorting the unsorted list or sorted lists,
that should now come back and
say they're equal.
And the lists are equal at this point,
because obviously we've got same numbers
and also they're both sorted as well.
So again, if you're used to
other programming languages,
this may well be very confusing to you.
The two objects are not the same and they
would not test equal in Java for example.
But Python works as you would intuitively
would expect if you're new to programming.
And it's obviously a bonus for you,
if you actually are new to programming.
So, I'm gonna end this video here.
In the next video we're going
to continue our work on lists.
And we're going to look at
some different formats and
ways to actually use replacement fields,
lists, and so on and so forth.
So, I'll see you in that next video.